---
layout: post
title:  "Coreos Setup"
date:   2016-05-10 12:12:48
categories: sites coreos
---

INSTALL A COREOS CLUSTER IN THREE METAL SERVERS
===============================================

1. Create Boot USB Disk

Download coreos bootable disk image from this link

https://stable.release.core-os.net/amd64-usr/current/coreos_production_iso_image.iso

Create a bootable USB disk from this image

In MacOx

  a. Convert the image file format
  
``` 
hdiutil convert -format UDRW -o ~/path/to/target.img ~/path/to/ubuntu.iso

```

  b. Insert USB stick and determines the Device Node for the USB Drive
  
```
    diskutil list
```

  c. Unmount USB stick
  
```
diskutil unmountDisk /dev/diskN
```
  
  d. Create the Bootable USB Drive

```
sudo dd if=/path/to/target.img.dmg of=/dev/rdiskN bs=1m
diskutil eject /dev/diskN
```

2. Create ssh public key

With public key authentication, the authenticating entity has a public key and a private key. Each key is a large number with special mathematical properties. The private key is kept on the computer you log in from, while the public key is stored on the .ssh/authorized_keys file on all the computers you want to log in to. When you log in to a computer, the SSH server uses the public key to "lock" messages in a way that can only be "unlocked" by your private key - this means that even the most resourceful attacker can't snoop on, or interfere with, your session. As an extra security measure, most SSH programs store the private key in a passphrase-protected format, so that if your computer is stolen or broken in to, you should have enough time to disable your old public key before they break the passphrase and start using your key. Wikipedia has a more detailed explanation of how keys work.


To create your public and private SSH keys on the command-line:
```
mkdir ~/.ssh
chmod 700 ~/.ssh
ssh-keygen -t rsa
```
Your public key is now available as .ssh/id_rsa.pub in your home folder.

3. Register in https://discovery.etc.io

In order to booststrap a cluster, a key has to be obtained from

```
curl -w "\n" 'https://discovery.etc.io/new?size=3'
````

The resulting key has to be included in the config_cloud file

3. Create cloud_config file


4. Install in each metal


5. Reboot metals



HOW TO CREATE A PARTITION ON SEVERAL DISK COREOS
================================================

1. Create a filesystem across sda & sdb - CoreOS on sdc (metadata mirrored, linear data allocation)

``` 
    $ sudo mkfs.btrfs /dev/sda /dev/sdb
    $ sudo systemctl stop docker
```

2. Backup current /var/lib/docker

```
$ sudo mv /var/lib/docker .

$ sudo mkdir /var/lib/docker
```

3. Mount any of the btrfs devices


```
$ sudo mount /dev/sda /var/lib/docker
$ sudo chmod 700 /var/lib/docker
$ sudo systemctl start docker
```

4. to make sure the drive will be mounted add the following unit to the cloud config:

```
    units:
        - name: var-lib-docker.mount
          command: start
          content: |
                [Unit]
                Description=Mount /dev/sda to /var/lib/docker
                Before=docker.service
                [Mount]
                What=/dev/sda
                Where=/var/lib/docker
                Type=btrfs
```

HOW TO TOTALLY RESEET CLUSTER
===

etcd stores data on disk at /var/lib/etcd2/. Removing all files in that directory will reset etcd, incluing clustering info. You will need to do this on al of your nodes and then re-cluster everything. If you used cloud-config to configure your discovery token, peer address, etc. you will need to update your cloud-config file with the new clustering info and new token
