---
layout: post
title:  "ExpressJS"
date:   2017-09-14 21:21:27
categories: javascript programming
tags: javascript express
---

Express is a framework that uses Node.js web
server functionality to simplify its API and add
other features. It makes it easier to organize applications
functionality with middleware and routing; it adds
utilities to Node.js HTTP objects; it facilitates
the rendering of dynamic HTML views; it defines an
easily implemented extensibility standard.

The javascript function that processes browser requests
in you application is called a request handler. In code,
its a function that takes to arguments: an object
that represents the requests and an object that
represents the response.

At a high level, Express provides four major features:

1. Middleware: Express has a middleware stack, which
is an array of functions. Rather than one monolithic request handler function,
you call several request handler functions that each
deal with a small chunck of work. These smaller requests
handler function are called middleware functions,
or middleware.

2. Routing: Functions that are called only when you
visit a specific URL with a specific method. These request handles are executed conditionally,
depending on what URL and HTTP method a client
sends.

3. __Extensions__ to requests and response objects:
extra methods and properties for developer convenience.

4. Views: Allow to dynamically render HTML. This
allows to change the HTML on the fly and to write
the HTML in other languages.

Express.js [link](http://www.expressjs.com)

Bookshelf.js [link](http://www.bookshelfjs.org)

## 1. MIDDLEWARE

Framework-free Node requires writing a single large
requests handler founction for your entire app. 
Middleware allows to break these request handles
functions into smaller bits. These smaller functions
tend to handle one thing at a time.

Rather than having just one handler, middleware
allows for many to happen in sequence. Rather than
having the request pass through one function, it
passes through an array of functions called a
middleware stack.

Each middleware function can modify the request or
the response, but it doesn't always have to. Eventually,
some middleware should respond to the request. If none
of them respond, then the server will hang and 
the browser will sit alone, without a response.

This is powerful because an application can be 
splitted into many small parts. These components
become easier to compose and reorder and it is 
also easy to pull third-party middleware.

### Middleware and the middleware stack

Web servers listen for request, parse those requests,
and send responses. The Node runtime will get these
requests firt and turn them from raw bytes into two
Javascript objects that you can hendel one object 
for the request (req) and one object for the response
(res).

In Express these objects are passed through an array
of functions, called the middleware stack. Express
will start at the first function in the stack and 
continue in order down the stack. Every function in 
this stack takes three arguments. The first twe are
req and res. They are given by Node. The third 
argument is itself a function, conventionally 
called `next`. When next is called, Express will go on
to the next function in the stack. Eventually, one 
of these functions must call `res.end`, which will
end the request.

There are two types of middleware. The first type
are regular middleware functions that take three
arguments. Most of the time, the app is in normal
mode, which looks only at theses middleware function
and skips the other.

The second kind is error-handling middleware. When 
the application is in error mode all regular 
middleware is ignored and Express will execute
only error-handling middleware functions. To enter
error mode, call next with an
argument. Its contion to call it with an error 
object.

These middleware functions take four arguments. The
first one is the error (the argument passed into 
`next`), and the remainder are: `req`, `res` and `next`.

Calling next with no arguments will exit error mode
and move onto the next normal middleware; calling
it with and argument will continue onto the next 
error-handling middleware if one exists.

### Other middleware

There is only one piece of middleware that is bundled
with Express: _express.static_. The Express team
maintains a number of middleware modules:
- body-parser (for parsign request bodies)
- cookie-parser (for parsing cookies from users,
paired with express-session to keep track of users)
- compression (for compressing responses to save on
bytes)

Other important middleware:
- Helmet (helps secure applications) <a href="https://helmetjs.github.io"><span class="oi oi-external-link" title="helmet" aria-hidden="true"></span></a>
- connect-asset (compiles and minifies CSS and Javasript assets)

Some third-party middleware:
- Morgan: logging middleware connect-rate limit
- Helmet: prevent some attacks
- cookie-parser: parses cookies
- response-time: sends the X-Response-time header to
debug the performance of application.

## 2. ROUTING

Routing is a way to map requests to specific handlers
on ther URL and HTTP verb.

The first argument is a path. The second argument is
a request handler function similar to middleware 
section. In addition to matching fixed routes, they
can match more complex ones.

Routing maps verbs and URIs to specific code. It maps
an HTTP verb + URI combo to a request handler.

Routes can have parameters. The simplest way to grab
a parameter is by putting it in the route with a colon
in front of it. To grab the value, you'll look inside
the params property of the request.

Express allows to sepecify routers as strings and to
specify them as regular expressions.

Another common way to dynamically pass information in
URLs is to use query strings. These can be retrieved
with `req.query`.

### Routers

A router is an isolated instance of middleware and
routes. Routers can be thought of as "mini" applications
only capable of performing middleware and routing.
Every Express application has a built-in app router.

Router behavve like middleware and can be ".use()d"
by the app in other routers. Routers allow to chunk
a big app into numerous miniapps that can be later put
together.

### Serving Static Files

`path.resolve` helps keep path resolution cross-plataform.

Middleware can be mounted at a given prefix.

{% highlight javascript %}
var apath = path.resolve(__dirname, "apath");
app.use("/otherpath", express.static("apath"));
{% endhighlight %}

Because express static is middleware, you can just
apply it multiple times.

## 3. Extending request and response

The response object gets conveniences. The request
object gets a number of cool properties and methods
[See Express API](https://expressjs.com/en/4x/api.html)

## 4. Views

A number of different view engines are available to
dynamically generate HTML (EJS, Handlebars, Pug, other)


## 5. Example of a books catalog

### Create server

To generate app exbooks:

{% highlight javascript %}
express-generator --pug -s stylus -v pug --git exbooks
{% endhighlight %}

This creates a file structure as this:

{% highlight bash %}
exbook
|-- app.js
|-- bin
|-- package.json
|-- public
|-- routes
`-- views
{% endhighlight %}

{% highlight bash %}
cd <appname>
git init   // if version control is needed
npm install  // install modules
npm install --save bookshelf knex sqlite3  //A dd sqlite3 database support
DEBUG=exbooks:* nodemon  // start application in debug ode
{% endhighlight %}

In `app.js` add:
{% highlight javascript %}
var booksRouter = require('./routes/books');  // at line 10
app.use('/books', booksRouter);               // at line 27
{% endhighlight %}

To get collection of books in json format. Create `./routes/books.js` and add:
{% highlight javascript %}
var express = require('express');
var Book = require('../models/book');
var router = express.Router();

/* GET Books. */
router.route('/')
  .get(function(req, res) {
    Book
      .fetchAll()
      .then(function(books) {
        res.json({ books });
      });
  });

module.exports = router;
{% endhighlight %}

Create folder `./models` and file `./models/book.js` and write:
{% highlight javascript %}
'use strict';
var bookshelf = require('../data/bookshelf');
var Book = bookshelf.Model.extend({
  tableName: 'books',
});
module.exports = Book;
{% endhighlight %}

Create folder `./data` and file `./data/bookshelf.js` and write:
{% highlight javascript %}
'use strict';
var knex = require('knex')(require('./knexfile'));
var bookshelf = require('bookshelf')(knex);
module.exports = bookshelf;
{% endhighlight %}

Create file `./data/knexfile.js` and write:
{% highlight javascript %}
'use strict';
module.exports = {
  client: 'sqlite3',
  connection: {
    filename: './data/books.sqlite3',
  },
  useNullAsDefault: true,
};
{% endhighlight %}

To create the database file, you can use migrations: Create folder `./migrations` and file `./migrations/books.js` and write:
{% highlight javascript %}
'use strict';
exports.up = function(knex) {
  return knex.schema
    .createTable('books', function(table) {
      table.increments('id').primary();
      table.string('title');
      table.string('author');
      table.string('isbn');
      table.string('publication_date');
      table.string('acquired_date');
      table.string('tags');
    });
};
exports.down = function(knex) {
  return knex.schema
    .dropTable('books');
};
{% endhighlight %}

Then add to package.json the following script:
{% highlight json %}
...
"scripts": {
  ... ,
  "migrate": "knex migrate:latest"
},
...
{% endhighlight %}

Now you can run `npm run migrate` to create the database file.

To create a query of the table, add to `.\routes\books.js`

{% highlight javascript %}
...
router.route('/')
  .get(function(req, res) {
    Book
      .where(req.query)    // Add this one line
      .fetchAll()
      .then(function(books) {
        res.json({ books });
      });
  })
  ...
...
{% endhighlight %}

With the simple addition of a where() function/clause we can now send GET requests like http://127.0.0.1:3000/book?id=1 and it will only return records that match the query.

To parse parameters like:

http://127.0.0.1:3000/title/Linux


{% highlight javascript %}
router.route('/title/:title')
  .get(function(req, res) {  
    Book
      .where('title', 'like' , '%'+req.params.title + '%')   // this looks if title contains parameter title
      .fetchAll()
      .then(function(books) {
        res.json({ books });
    });
});

{% endhighlight %}

##### Create frontend in express

Instead of responding with a JSON structure. Express can render template files in `./views` directory.

To render the template `./views/books.pug` change .get(function) as follows:

{% highlight javascript %}
...
router.route('/')
  .get(function(req, res) {
    Book
      .where(req.query) 
      .fetchAll()
      .then(function(books) {
        // render ./views/books.pug file with JSON collection books
        res.render({books, books.toJSON()});  // add this line
      });
  })
  ...
...
{% endhighlight %}

